Medullary carcinomas of the thyroid are neuroendocrine neoplasms derived from the parafollicular cells (C cells). They account for approximately 5% of thyroid neoplasms. Medullary carcinomas, like normal C cells, secrete calcitonin, the measurement of which plays an important role in the diagnosis and postoperative follow-up of patients. Calcitonin is a regulator of calcium metabolism. It is normally produced in response to hypercalcemia, and it reduces serum calcium by inhibiting osteoclast activity and renal tubular reabsorp- tion of calcium. In some instances, the tumor cells elaborate other polypeptide hormones, such as serotonin, ACTH, and vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP). About 70% of tumors arise sporadically. The remainder occur in the setting of MEN-2A or MEN-2B syndromes. Recall that activating point mutations in the RET proto-oncogene play an important role in the development of both familial and sporadic medullary carcinomas. Cases associated with MEN-2A or MEN-2B occur in younger patients, and they may even arise during the first decade of life. In contrast, sporadic and familial medullary carcinomas are neoplasms of adult- hood, with a peak incidence in the 40s and 50s.

MORPHOLOGY
Sporadic medullary thyroid carcinomas present as a solitary nodule (Fig. 24.22A). In contrast, bilaterality and multicentricity are common in familial cases. Larger lesions often contain areas of necrosis and hemorrhage and may extend through the capsule of the thyroid.The tumors are firm, pale gray to tan, and infiltrative. There may be foci of hemorrhage and necrosis in larger lesions. Microscopically, medullary carcinomas are composed of polygonal to spindle-shaped cells, which may form nests, trabeculae, and even follicles. Small, more anaplastic cells are present in some tumors and may be the predominant cell type. Amyloid deposits derived from calcitonin polypeptides are present in the stroma in many cases (Fig. 24.22B). Calcitonin is readily demonstrable within the cytoplasm of the tumor cells as well as in the stromal amyloid by immunohistochemical methods. As with all neuroen- docrine tumors, electron microscopy reveals variable numbers of membrane-bound electron-dense granules within the cytoplasm of the neoplastic cells (Fig. 24.23). One of the features of familial medullary cancers is the presence of multicentric C-cell hyper- plasia in the surrounding thyroid parenchyma, a feature that is usually absent in sporadic lesions, and that is believed to be a precursor lesion in familial cases. Thus, the presence of multiple prominent clusters of C cells scattered throughout the parenchyma should raise the specter of an inherited predisposition, even if a family history is not present.

Clinical Features
Sporadic cases of medullary carcinoma come to medical attention most often as a mass in the neck, sometimes associated with dysphagia or hoarseness. In some instances, the initial manifestations are those of a paraneoplastic syndrome caused by the secretion of a peptide hormone (e.g., diarrhea due to the secretion of VIP, or Cushing syndrome due to ACTH). Notably, hypocalcemia is not a prominent feature, despite the presence of raised calcitonin levels. In addition to circulating calcitonin, secretion of carcinoembryonic antigen by the neoplastic cells is a useful biomarker, especially for presurgical assessment of tumor load and in calcitonin-negative tumors.

Patients with familial syndromes may come to atten- tion because of symptoms localized to the thyroid or as a result of endocrine neoplasms in other organs (e.g., adrenal or parathyroid glands). Medullary carcinomas arising in the context of MEN-2B are generally more aggressive and metastasize more frequently than those occurring in patients with sporadic tumors or MEN-2A. As discussed later, asymptomatic MEN-2 individuals carrying germline RET mutations are offered prophylactic thyroidectomy as early as possible to prevent the otherwise inevitable development of medullary carcinoma, the major risk factor for poor outcome in these individuals. Sometimes the only histologic finding in the resected thyroid of asymptomatic carriers is the presence of C-cell hyperplasia or small (<1 cm) “micromedullary” carcinomas. Several small-molecule inhibi- tors of RET tyrosine kinase have recently been developed and have shown considerable promise in clinical trials of patients with medullary carcinoma.