Follicular carcinoma accounts for 5% to 15% of primary thyroid cancers; it is more frequent in areas with dietary iodine deficiency, where it constitutes 25% to 40% of thyroid cancers. It is more common in women (3 :1) and presents more often in older patients than does papillary carcinoma; the peak incidence is between 40 and 60 years of age.

 MORPHOLOGY Follicular carcinomas are single nodules that may be well circumscribed or widely infiltrative (Fig. 24.20A). Sharply demarcated lesions may be exceedingly difficult to distinguish from follicular adenomas by gross examination. Larger lesions may penetrate the capsule and infiltrate into the adjacent neck. They are gray to tan to pink on cut section and may be translucent due to the presence of large, colloid-filled follicles. Degenerative changes, such as central fibrosis and foci of calcification, may be present.

Microscopically, most follicular carcinomas are composed of fairly uniform cells forming small follicles containing colloid, quite reminiscent of normal thyroid (Fig. 24.20B). In other cases, follicular differentiation may be less apparent, and there may be nests or sheets of cells without colloid. Occasional tumors are dominated by cells with abundant granular, eosinophilic cytoplasm (Hürthle cell or oncocytic variant of follicular carcinoma). Whatever the pattern, the nuclei lack the features typical of papillary carcinoma, and psammoma bodies are not present. There is no reliable cytologic difference between follicular adenomas and minimally invasive follicular carcinomas. Making this distinction requires extensive histologic sampling of the tumor capsule to exclude capsular and/or vascular invasion (Fig. 24.21). The criterion for vascular invasion is applicable only to capsular vessels and vascular spaces beyond the capsule; the presence of tumor plugs within intra-tumoral blood vessels has little prognostic significance. Unlike in papillary cancers, lymphatic spread is uncommon in follicular cancers. By contrast, the diagnosis of carcinoma is obvious in widely invasive follicular carcinomas, which infiltrate the thyroid parenchyma and extrathyroidal soft tissues. Histologically, these cancers tend to have a greater proportion of solid or trabecular growth pattern, less evidence of follicular differentiation, and increased mitotic activity.

Clinical Features
Follicular carcinomas present as slowly enlarging painless nodules. Most frequently they are cold nodules on scintigrams, although rare, better-differentiated lesions may be hyperfunctional, take up radioactive iodine, and appear warm on scintigraphy. Because follicular carcinomas have little propensity for invading lymphatics, regional lymph nodes are typically not involved, while vascular (hematogenous) dissemination is common, with metastases to bone, lungs, liver, and elsewhere.

The prognosis depends largely on the extent of invasion and stage at presentation. Widely invasive follicular carcinoma often presents with systemic metastases, and as many as one-half of affected patients succumb to their disease within 10 years. This is in sharp contrast to minimally invasive follicular carcinomas, which have a 10-year survival rate of greater than 90%. Most follicular carcinomas are treated with total thyroidectomy followed by the administration of radioactive iodine, which can be used to identify metastases and to ablate such lesions. In addition, because any residual follicular carcinoma may respond to TSH stimulation, patients are usually treated with thyroid hormone after surgery to suppress endogenous TSH levels. Serum thyroglobulin levels are used for monitoring tumor recurrence, because this thyroid protein should be barely detectable in a patient who is free of disease.